---
layout: default
title: Iyeru and Tygea
---

*Although it can not be accurately dated, the story of Iyeru and Tygea is very old.  It is believed to be the template for many stories told throughout the third creation, perhaps dating back to the first few generations after the third children crossed west over the [Great River](Yeron.html).  It can be assumed that the story has changed over the several thousand years since creation, but the names and the elements are usually easy to identify from one telling to the next.*

*The version given here is from a scroll that claims to be enscribed by [Geranicus](Geranicus.html), an adventurer and a collector of such stories in pre-empire [Arducia](Arducia.html).  He in turn alleges to have transliterated it from an ancient frieze in the ruined city of [Kerst](Kerst.html) before it's stones were hauled away to repair the walls of [Soubous(City)](Soubous.html).  The length of his version of the story suggests he embellished the frieze liberally, either with details he borrowed from other versions of the same story, or with flourishes he made up from whole cloth.  As with everthing else Geranicus published, it can be difficult to separate his real sources from his own poetic additions.  Nonetheless, his version generally matches other, equally ancient, versions of the story from a variety of races and cultures.*

In ancient Kerst, before the first dynasty, ruled the sorcerer Gharfi.  He was cruel and powerful, and ruled his city with a wicked hand.  One day Gharfi decided he would marry and he worked his magics to find the most beautiful woman in the world.  He spied a maiden named Tygea, in a far land called Arza, and resolved to have her for his own.  Gharfi sent Iyeru, his most capable warrior, to the far lands of Arza to look upon this girl, woo and win her, and bring her back to Kerst.  To pay the bride price, Gharfi gave to Iyeru a vast treasure: a chest of precious gems, a sack of platinum coin, a magic cloak that turned the wearer into any shape he desired, a magic horn that could hear conversations over great distances, and ring that gave the wearer a powerful persuasion.

Iyeru traveled for many weeks over mountains and across the sea.  Arza was in festival when he arrived.  There were games during the day, and at night the citizens wore fantastic masks to parade  around the city.  The wealthy and noble from all around were gathered in Arza for the merrymaking.  Tygea's father was a wealthy merchant, who cared more for the state of his coffers than his daughter.  When Iyeru showed the merchant the many precious gifts and magical items Gharfi offered for his daughter, he became greedy and wanted more.  Each day Iyeru offered more of Gharfi's treasure.

While he bartered with the merchant during the day, at night Iyeru donned his festival mask and wooed Tygea.  During these festival-fueled nights he conceived a passion for young Tygea, so he resolved to take her for his own.  They fled Arza together, and set sail for far lands.  

Everywhere they went they were pursued, first by Tygea's father, and then by Gharfi and his minions.  Iyeru was a cunning warrior, and they were not easily taken by surprise.  After some years their money began to run out and all they had left was their small sailing ship.  They set sail for the last time, heading for the newly-risen islands of Kord's Ring, where Gharfi's old magic could hold no sway over the newly formed lands.  

But Gharfi had a new champion whom he sent to Kord's Ring to find and kill not Iyeru, but Tygea.  This man approached her in the guise of friendship, then struck with deadly results.  Iyeru he left untouched, his mission being finished.  

Iyeru climbed to the highest peak on the island and there he raised a stone altar for her.  He used their ship's sails to wrap her body, and its timbers to build her pyre.  Her burned her body there on the highest peak of the new world.  He stayed on the mountain for many days, until hunger drove him back down into the forest.  Nobody knows how long he lived on that island, but at the end of his days he refused to die and leave his lost love's resting place unguarded.  He donned the magic cloak and became a field of flowers at the secret path to her resting place, so he could forever watch over her.
